# BUG FIX 2023.07.25

We have noticed a small bug when computing the translation vector from the heatmaps. Previously, in the function `solve_pose_from_heatmaps` of `core/utils/postprocess.py`, we've limited the range of the translation vector from PnP to be within [0, 10] (m), a known translation distribution of the SPEED+ dataset. This strategy was adopted since SPEC2021 required submission of predictions on all images, whether they are outliers or not. Therefore, instead of submitting absurdly large values that will contaminate the average translation error, we went for a simple post-processing of clipping the range of translation vector.

Our bug in implementing this post-processing was to do below in line 55:
```
# Correction based on known SPEED+ pose distribution
t = np.clip(t, 0, 10)
```
which clips the entire translation vector to be within [0, 10] (m), when its xy-components are along the image plane and can thus have negative values. This error made the reported translation error from the heatmaps *underperform* the actual performance as it confines all translation vectors in the camera frame to one quadrant of an image.

Our correction is to instead report the number of outliers and exclude them from computing the mean pose errors from the heatmaps. To do so, the rejection criterion is set based on a viewing frustum in front of the camera with maximum distance of 50 m, an approximately maximum distance at which the Tango spacecraft appears barely resolved (this was also approximately the maximum distance of the SPEED dataset). We also exclude any solutions if less than 5 heatmaps were detected. The new rejection criterion is shown below:
```
#! Added on 2023/07/02
# Correction based on camera physics
z_max = 50 # [m]

if t[2] < 0 or t[2] > z_max:
    # --- 1. Check z limit
    reject = True
else:
    # --- 2. Check xy limits based on estimated z distance
    x_max = t[2] * np.tan(camera["horizontalFOV"]/2)
    y_max = x_max / camera["Nu"] * camera["Nv"]

    if t[0] < -x_max or t[0] > x_max or t[1] < -y_max or t[1] > y_max:
        reject = True

return keypts, q, t, reject
```
The rejection only happens to the pose solutions from the heatmaps. In the paper, the final results report translation errors from the EfficientPose (i.e., regression) head and orientation errors from the Heatmap head *regardless of outliers due to translation vector from the Heatmap head.*  Therefore, the majority of the reported results are not affected by this bug.